========================
semlix 3.0 release notes
========================

semlix 3.0.0
============

This is a major release that rebrands the project from Whoosh to semlix and adds
powerful semantic search capabilities while maintaining full backward compatibility
with existing Whoosh code.

Major Changes
-------------

* **Project Rebrand**: Complete rebrand from Whoosh to semlix. The name "semlix"
  stands for **Sem**antic + **L**exical + **I**ndex, reflecting the library's
  hybrid search capabilities.

* **Semantic Search**: Added comprehensive semantic search functionality that
  combines traditional lexical (keyword-based) search with modern vector-based
  semantic similarity search. This allows semlix to understand meaning and context
  beyond simple keyword matching.

* **Hybrid Search**: New hybrid search system that intelligently combines lexical
  and semantic search results using multiple fusion algorithms (RRF, Linear, DBSF).

* **Backward Compatibility**: All existing Whoosh code continues to work without
  modification. The rebrand is transparent to existing users.

New Features
------------

Semantic Search Components
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* :class:`semlix.semantic.HybridIndexWriter`: Index writer that maintains both
  lexical (semlix) and semantic (vector) indexes in sync.

* :class:`semlix.semantic.HybridSearcher`: Searcher that performs hybrid search
  combining lexical and semantic results.

* :class:`semlix.semantic.stores.VectorStore`: Base interface for vector storage.
  Implementations include:
  
  * :class:`semlix.semantic.stores.NumpyVectorStore`: Pure Python implementation
    using NumPy arrays.
  
  * :class:`semlix.semantic.stores.FaissVectorStore`: High-performance implementation
    using Facebook's FAISS library for large-scale deployments.

Embedding Providers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* :class:`semlix.semantic.SentenceTransformerProvider`: Uses sentence-transformers
  library for local embedding generation.

* :class:`semlix.semantic.OpenAIProvider`: Integration with OpenAI's embedding API.

* :class:`semlix.semantic.CohereProvider`: Integration with Cohere's embedding API.

* :class:`semlix.semantic.HuggingFaceInferenceProvider`: Uses Hugging Face Inference
  API for embeddings.

Result Fusion
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* **RRF (Reciprocal Rank Fusion)**: Default fusion method that combines results
  from multiple sources using reciprocal ranking.

* **Linear Fusion**: Weighted linear combination of scores.

* **DBSF (Distributed Borda Score Fusion)**: Advanced fusion algorithm for
  distributed search scenarios.

API Changes
-----------

* The ``whoosh_index`` parameter in semantic search classes has been renamed to
  ``index`` for consistency and clarity:
  
  * :class:`semlix.semantic.HybridIndexWriter`: ``index`` parameter instead of
    ``whoosh_index``
  
  * :class:`semlix.semantic.HybridSearcher`: ``index`` parameter instead of
    ``whoosh_index``
  
  * :func:`semlix.semantic.build_vector_store_from_index`: ``index`` parameter
    instead of ``whoosh_index``

* Internal variable names updated for consistency:
  
  * ``_whoosh_writer`` → ``_writer`` in :class:`semlix.semantic.HybridIndexWriter`
  
  * ``_WhooshBase`` → ``_SemlixBase`` in :class:`semlix.compat` (internal)

* Default file extension for temporary indexes changed from ``.whoosh`` to
  ``.semlix`` in :class:`semlix.util.testing.TempDir`.

* Google App Engine namespace changed from ``"whooshlocks"`` to ``"semlixlocks"``
  in :class:`semlix.filedb.gae.MemcacheLock`.

Package Structure
-----------------

* Package renamed from ``whoosh`` to ``semlix``:
  
  * All imports now use ``semlix`` instead of ``whoosh``
  
  * Source code moved from ``src/whoosh/`` to ``src/semlix/``
  
  * All module paths updated accordingly

* New semantic search modules:
  
  * ``semlix.semantic``: Core semantic search functionality
  
  * ``semlix.semantic.stores``: Vector store implementations
  
  * ``semlix.semantic.embeddings``: Embedding provider implementations

Documentation
-------------

* Complete documentation update reflecting the rebrand to semlix.

* New semantic search documentation in :doc:`/semantic` covering:
  
  * Getting started with semantic search
  
  * Hybrid indexing and searching
  
  * Embedding providers
  
  * Vector stores
  
  * Result fusion algorithms
  
  * Migration guide

* All code examples updated to use ``semlix`` imports and API.

* Historical references to Whoosh maintained where appropriate to acknowledge
  the project's origins.

Installation
------------

* Package name changed from ``whoosh`` to ``semlix`` on PyPI.

* Basic installation::
  
    pip install semlix

* With semantic search capabilities::
  
    pip install semlix[semantic]

* Full semantic search with all providers and FAISS support::
  
    pip install semlix[semantic-full]

Compatibility
-------------

* **Fully backward compatible**: All existing Whoosh code works without
  modification. Simply change imports from ``whoosh`` to ``semlix``.

* Index format compatibility: semlix 3.0 can read and write indexes created by
  Whoosh 2.x. The index format remains compatible.

* API compatibility: All public APIs remain the same, with the exception of
  semantic search classes where ``whoosh_index`` parameter was renamed to
  ``index``.

* Format names: Legacy format names (``whoosh3``, ``whoosh2``) are maintained
  for compatibility with existing indexes.

Project Information
-------------------

* Repository moved to: https://github.com/semlix/semlix
* Maintained by: Alberto Fernandez (albertof@barrahome.org)
* Based on: Whoosh (created by Matt Chaput)
* License: Simplified BSD (two-clause) license

Migration Guide
--------------

For existing Whoosh users:

1. **Update imports**: Change all ``from whoosh`` and ``import whoosh`` to
   ``from semlix`` and ``import semlix``.

2. **Update package installation**: Uninstall ``whoosh`` and install ``semlix``::
   
   pip uninstall whoosh
   pip install semlix

3. **No code changes required**: All existing code continues to work. Your
   indexes, schemas, and queries work exactly as before.

4. **Optional: Add semantic search**: To add semantic search capabilities,
   see the :doc:`/semantic` documentation.

Example migration::

    # Before (Whoosh)
    from whoosh.index import create_in
    from whoosh.fields import Schema, TEXT, ID
    
    # After (semlix)
    from semlix.index import create_in
    from semlix.fields import Schema, TEXT, ID
    
    # Everything else works the same!

Internal Changes
---------------

* Updated all internal references from "Whoosh" to "semlix" in:
  
  * Docstrings and comments
  
  * Error messages
  
  * Logging namespaces
  
  * Test data and examples

* Maintained historical references where appropriate (e.g., URLs, email addresses
  in examples, format names).

* Updated project metadata in ``setup.py`` and configuration files.

Dependencies
------------

* **Core**: No new dependencies. semlix remains a pure Python library with
  minimal dependencies.

* **Semantic search**: Optional dependencies for semantic search features:
  
  * ``numpy``: Required for semantic search (included in ``semlix[semantic]``)
  
  * ``sentence-transformers``: For local embedding generation
  
  * ``openai``: For OpenAI embeddings
  
  * ``cohere``: For Cohere embeddings
  
  * ``huggingface_hub``: For Hugging Face Inference API
  
  * ``faiss-cpu`` or ``faiss-gpu``: For high-performance vector storage

Performance
-----------

* Semantic search performance depends on the chosen vector store:
  
  * ``NumpyVectorStore``: Good for small to medium indexes (< 1M documents)
  
  * ``FaissVectorStore``: Optimized for large-scale indexes with millions of
    documents

* Hybrid search adds minimal overhead to lexical search while providing
  significant improvements in search quality for conceptual queries.

* Embedding generation can be batched for efficiency using the ``batch_size``
  parameter in :class:`semlix.semantic.HybridIndexWriter`.

Future Plans
------------

* Continued development of semantic search features

* Performance optimizations for large-scale deployments

* Additional embedding provider integrations

* Enhanced fusion algorithms

* Improved documentation and examples

